# 4.0 - Sorting

In this lecture, we'll start looking at sorting. We'll start by introducing the general problem and Java's Comparable interface. We'll then dive in by studying some simple and intuitive sorting methods (the insertion, selection and shell sorts). We'll then look at two methods for shuffling an array and finally look at an application of sorting.

## Sorting Independent of Data Type

The basic sorting problem is to rearrange items in an array according to some predefined piece of data (the `key`) that each item in the array possesses.

In principle, we want to be able to sort any kind of data. Some examples include:
* Sorting random real numbers in ascending order
* Sorting strings from a file in alphabetical order.
* Sort the files in a given directory by filename

These are all completely different types of data. How can we write one sort client that can sort all these kinds of data?

The answer is to use callbacks to reference each object's `compareTo()` method. The specific implementations of that method will contain the domain-specific knowledge needed to compare items.

Different languages implement these callbacks in different ways. For example:
* **Java** - interfaces
* **C**  - function pointers
* **C++** - class-type functions
* **C#** - delegates
* **Pythin, Perl, ML** and **Javascript** - first-class functions

We will, of course, be looking at how Java does this in a little more detail.

## The `Comparable` Interface

In Java, the `Comparable` interface is a interface that implements one method:

```Java
public interface Comparable<Item> {
  public int compareTo(Item item);
}
```
Many common Java types (e.g. `File`) implement it by default. As long as a data type implements this interface, it can be sorted. ALl we have to do is use polymorphism to pass in variables of type `Comparable` to our sort method. Example code in such a sort method might look like:

```Java
if (a[j].compareTo(a[j-1]) < 0) {...}
```

### Total Orders

There are certain rules that must be adhered to when implementing the `compareTo` method. Namely, the items must satisfy the requirements for a `total order`, i.e.:
* **Antisymmetry** - if v <= w and w <= v, v == w
* **Transitivity** - if v <= w, and w <= x, v <= x
* **Totality** - Either v <= w, or w <= v, or both.

(An example of an order that doesn't satisfy these properties is rock-paper-scissors, which is not transitive)

### Implementation Details

By convention, if implementing `compareTo()` (i.e. so that `v.compareTo(w)`), we need to ensure that our implementation:
* is a total order
* returns a -ve integer, 0, or a +ve integer if v is less than, equal to, or greater than w, respectively.
* Throws an exception if incompatable types (or either is null)

## Two Useful Sorting Abstractions

We'll also define two useful helper functions to make it easier to generalise our sorting work to other languages. They are:

### `Less`

Is item v less than w?
```Java
private static boolean less(Comparable v, Comparable w) {
  return v.compareTo(w) < 0;
}
```

### `Exchange`

Swap item in array a[] at index i with the one at index j

```Java
private static void exch(Comparable[] a, int i, int j) {
  Comparable swap = a[i];
  a[i] = a[j];
  a[j] = swap;
}
```

Restricting ourselves to the use of these two methods in our sorting methods will also help promote good practice by ensuring we don't inadvertantly start setting array information directly, which could lead us to corrupt our data.