# 4.1 - Selection Sort

The first sorting method we'll have a look at is the selection sort.

## The Algorithm

The algorithm for this method is very simple:
1. Initialise an index i = 0;
2. Go through the array from index i to the end and find the smallest remaining entry (e.g. at index min).
3. Swap a[i] and a[min]
4. Increment i
5. Repeat steps 2-4 until i == array.length

### Invariants

It can sometimes help to think of algorithms in terms of **invariants**. In the selection sort algorithm:
* Everything item with an index less than i is fixed, and in ascending order.
* No item with an index greater than or equal to i is smaller than an entry with an index less than i.

To implement the algorithm, all we do is increment i, and then do any work necessary to maintain the invariants. This immediately gives us our code for the selection sort implementation:

```Java
public class Selection {
  
  public static void sort(Comparable[] a) {
    int N = a.length;
    
    for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
      int min = i;
      for (int j = i+1; j < N; j++) {
        if (less(a[j], a[min])) {
          min = j;
        }
      }
      exch(a, i, min);
    }
  }
  
  //less implementation from before
  //exch implementation from before
}
```

For practice, let's also implement this in Swift, which doesn't index arrays in the same way Java does. Included below are two implementations. The first, written as an `Array` extension, was written by me based off the Java implementation. The second, written as an extension to `MutableCollection`, is more general purpose and more functional.

```Swift
// My original implementation on an array
extension Array where Element: Comparable {
    mutating func selectionSort() {
        for (index, _) in self.enumerated() {
            var min = index
            for (innerIndex, innerItem) in self[index...].enumerated() {
                if innerItem < self[min] {
                    min = innerIndex + index
                }
            }
            swapAt(min, index)
        }
    }
}

// A better implementation on MutableCollection
extension MutableCollection where Element: Comparable {
    func selectionSorted() -> Self {
        var elements = self
        for index in indices {
            let slice = elements[index...]
            let (_, minIndex) = zip(slice, slice.indices).min(by: { $0.0 < $1.0 })!
            elements.swapAt(minIndex, index)
        }
        return elements
    }
}
```

## Complexity

Just by looking at the implementation it is easy to guess the complexity; you have two nested for loops, so you're likely to have O(N^2).

Doing our analysis more thoroughly, we can see in our implementation that in each loop we do N-i-1 comparisons. Thus, the total number of comparisons is the sum from 0 to N-1 ~ N^2/2. In addition, we also do N exchanges.

Thus, our **time complexity** is **~ N^2 / 2** (which confirms our earlier guess of O(N^2))

We can also see that our implementation does all our rearrangement in-place, thus our **space complexity** is **O(1)**. (Note that in the Swift implementation, we make a copy of the array which we return. Thus, that implementation is clearly O(N), but advantageously leaves the original array unchanged)

We also note that the **running time is insensitive to the input**, and that it does the **minimum amount of data movement**