# 4.2 - Insertion Sort

Insertion sort is another elementary sorting method. Interestingly, it has quite different performance charecteristics from selection sort (though, not, as we shall see, in its worst case time complexity)

## Algorithm

Another relatively simple algorithm:
1. Instantiate an index i = 0
2. If the element initially at index i is less than the element to its left, swap them.
3. Repeat step 2 with the element that was originally at index i until either it is greater than the element to its left, or it has reached the beginning of the array.
4. Increment i
5. Repeat steps 2-4 until i = the length of the array.

(Note that in the above, the item to the "left" is the item with the preceding array index)

### Invariants

Again, it can be helpful to think of this algorithm in terms of invariants:
* Entries to the left of i (and including i), are in ascending order
* Entries to the right of i have not been seen yet.

It is not immediately clear from the first invariant alone how we go about maintaining it. But the solution, of course, is contained in our earlier description of the algorithm.

The code for the insertion sort is:
```Java
public class Insertion {
  public static void sort(Comparable[] a) {
    for (int i = 0; i < a.length; i++) {
      
      for (int j = i; j > 0; j--) {
        if (less(a[j], a[j-1])) {
          exch(a, j, j-1)
        } else {
          break;
        }
      }
    }
  }
  
  //less implementation from before
  //exch implementation from before
}
```

## Complexity

The analysis of the insertion sort is more difficult than that of the selection sort because the number of comparisons we do depends on how the array was originally sorted.

In the **best case**, where the array is already sorted, we have to do N-1 comparisons and 0 exchanges.

In the **worst case**, where the array is sorted in *reverse order*, we have to do ~N^2/2 comparisons (the same as for the selection sort), and the same number of exchanges

In the **average case**, we do ~N^2/4 comparisons and ~N^2/4 exchanges. We can see this intuitively by expecting each element to move approximately halfway back. This means that on a random data set, it is about twice as fast as the selection sort.

## Partially Sorted Arrays

The insertion sort's linear nature in the best case means that there are cases where we take advantage of it. To demonstrate this, we introduce the idea of an **inversion**, which is when we have a pair of keys that are out of order. In the following sequence:

A E E L M O T R X P S

we have **6** inversions. (T-R, T-P, T-S, R-P, X-P, X-S)

We define an array to be **partially sorted** if *its number of inversions is <= cN*.

Examples inclues:
* The above array
* A subarray of size 10 appended to a sorted array of size N
* An array of size N with only 10 entries out of place

The interesting thing about insertion sort is that it runs in **linear** time on partially sorted arrays.