# 4.4 - Shuffling

Next up, we'll be looking at a problem related to sorting called shuffling. Conceptually this is the same as shuffling the cards in a deck; we want to randomize the order of a sequence of some kind. We'll look at two ways of doing this now.

## Shuffle Sort

One way to shuffle an array is to generate a random real number for every element in the array, and the sort the array according to those random real numbers.

We can show that this produces a uniformly random permutation of the input array, provided there are no duplicate values.

The obvious drawback is that we need to pay the cost of the sort. There turns out to be a way to shuffle an array in only **linear** time, and so faster than any of our sorts.

## The Knuth Fisher-Yates shuffle algorithm

The algorithm to suffle an array in linear time is quite simple:
1. Instantiate an index i=0
2. For each iteration i, pick an integer r between i and 0.
3. Swap a[i] and a[r]
4. Increment i
5. Repeat steps 2-4 until i == N

This was proved to produce a uniformly random permutation before computers were actually mainstream (in 1938!)

The code to implement it is:

```Java
public class StdRandom {
  public static void shuffle(Object[] a) {
    int N = a.length;
    for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
      int r = StdRandom.uniform(i);
      exch(a, i, r);
    }
  }
}
```
A common error is to choose an index from 0 to N-1 for `r` in every iteration. We can show that this does not produce a uniformly random array, so don't do it.

In Swift, this would look like:

```Swift
extension Array {
    // As of Swift 4.2, there is already a func called shuffled
    func knuthShuffled() -> Array {
        var elements = self
        for index in indices {
            let randomIndex = Int.random(in: index..<endIndex)
            elements.swapAt(index, randomIndex)
        }
        return elements
    }
}
```