# 11.1 - Hash Functions

The idealistic goal behind a hash function is that we'd be able to scramble the keys uniformly to produce a table index. In doing so, we'd have:
* An easily computable table index
* Each table index equally likely for each key

As an aside, the matter of having each table index equally likely is a problem that's been very thoroughly researched, but nonetheless still proves problematic in practical operations.

For example, let's say that the keys we're provided are phone numbers. In that case, you could use a variety of keys:

* **Bad**: Using the first 5 characters of the phone number as the key; many phone numbers will share the same area code
* **Better**: Using the last 3 characters, as these are more uniformly distributed
* **Best**: Finding a way to use all the data.

The practical challenge here appears to be that you need to take a different approach for every kind of key you have. Now, for common data types like `int` and `String`, you can rely on the implementers of Java to have come up with some decent hash functions. However, if you're using your own data type, then it's your job to come up with a suitable hash function.

## Java Conventions

All Java classes inherit a method `hashCode()` which returns a 32-bit `int` value. For this function, it's a requirement that identical values produce the same hashCode:

> If `x.equals(y)`, then `(x.hashCode() == y.hashCode())`

In addition, it'd be highly desirable if different values also had different hashCodes:

> If `!x.equals(y)`, then `(x.hashCode() != y.hashCode())`

The default implementation of the `hashCode` function in Java is just to return the memory address of `x`. This satisfies both of the above conditions, though it potentially does not satisfy the condition that all index values should be equally likely. If we wanted to satisfy that condition, we'd have to do some extra work.

Interestingly, a legal, but shitty, definition would just be to get `hashCode()` to return, say, `17` all the time. You satisfy the first condition, though you don't come anywhere near the second condition.

In addition, Java has custom implementations for each of the standard data types. E.g. `Integer, Double, String, File, URL, Date etc.`

Here are some implementations.

#### Integer

The integer implementation is the simplest, just return itself.

```Java
public final class Integer {
  private final int value;
  
  //...
  
  public int hashCode() { return value; }
}
```

#### Boolean

The boolean implementation just picks from one of two values.

```Java
public final class Boolean {
  private final boolean value;
  
  //...
  
  public int hashCode() { 
    if (value) return 1231;
    else       return 1237; 
  }
}
```

#### Double

The double value performs an XOR between the most significant 32 bits and the least significant 32 bits. Part of the reason for this is that you're trying to utilise all the bits you've been provided. This provides more uniqueness.

```Java
public final class Double {
  private final double value;
  
  //...
  
  public int hashCode() { 
    long bits = doubleToLongBits(value);
    return (int) (bits ^ (bits >>> 32));
  }
}
```

#### String

The string has function uses something called Horner's method. In essence, this treats the string as a giant number, and uses its values to generate a number with base-32.

```Java
public final class String {
  private final char[] s;
  
  //...
  
  public int hashCode() { 
    int hash = 0;
    for (int i = 0; i < length(); i++)
      hash = s[i] + (31 * hash);
    return hash;
  }
}
```

In fact, because strings are immutable, Java actually adds a performance optimization to the above hash method, where it caches the hash value after its calculated. The final method ends up looking like:

```Java
public final class String {
  private int hash = 0;
  private final char[] s;
  
  //...
  
  public int hashCode() { 
    int h = hash;
    if (h != 0) return h;
    
    for (int i = 0; i < length(); i++)
      h = s[i] + (31 * hash);
    hash = h
    return h;
  }
}
```

## Implementing Hash Code: User-defined types

Let's say we're making a hash function on a type of our own. Two guidelines that are good to follow are:
1. Use all of the data in your class
2. Use the Java defined hashCodes where possible.

So for a theoretical transaction type. This might end up looking like:

```Java
public final class Transaction implements Comparable<Transaction> {
  private final String who;
  private final Date when;
  private final double amount;
  
  public Transaction(String who, Date when, Double amount) { /*As before*/ }
  
  //...
  
  public boolean equals(Object y) { /*As before*/ }
  
  public int hashCode() {
    int hash = 17; // non-zero constant
    hash = 31 * hash + who.hashCode(); // For reference types, we can just call hashCode()
    hash = 31 * hash + when.hashCode();
    hash = 31 * hash + ((Double) amount).hashCode(); // We need to wrap primitive types.
    return hash;
  }
}
```

### Standard Recipe

We can generalise our above implementation to create a standard recipe we can follow when implementing hash functions of our own. The rules are:

1. Combine each significant field using the `31x + y` rule
2. If the field is a primitive type, use the wrapper type `hashCode()`
3. If the field is null, return 0;
4. If the field is a reference type, use `hashCode()`. (We can apply this rule recursively).
5. If the field is an array, apply to each entry. (The `Arrays.deepHashCode()` is an alternative)

In practice, this recipe works pretty well, and is used in several Java libraries.

In theory, it's actually possible to build keys that are "universal", i.e. every value is equally likely to appear. They're not widely used in practice though.

Our basic rule: you need to use the whole key to compute a hash code. For state-of-the-art codes, consult an expert.

## Modular Hashing

When we calculate a hash code, we get an `int` between -2^31 and 2^31 - 1. What we actually need is an `int` between `0` and `M-1`, where M is the array size.

The easiest way to do this is to just use a modulo operator. 

```Java
private int hash(Key key) { 
  return key.hashCode() % M; 
}
```

However, there's a bug in this simple code. Namely, because hashCodes can be negative, our hash function can return calues we don't want. This can be resolved with a `Math.abs` call:

```Java
private int hash(Key key) { 
  return Math.abs(key.hashCode()) % M; 
}
```
However, even this code has a bug in it, though it only appear very very rarely. Namely, our hashCode function could returns -2^31, which doesn't have a corresponding positive number. We can handle that case explicitly:

```Java
private int hash(Key key) { 
  return Math.abs(key.hashCode() & 0x7fffffff) % M; 
}
```

(An example of a `String` with a hashCode of -2^31 is "ploygenelubricants" )

### Uniform Hashing Assumption

The uniform hashing assumption is that:

> Each key is equally likely to hash to an integer between 0 and M - 1
 
Lots of good work has been done on this by researchers, and you can indeed get pretty close.

This assumption lets us model hashing using the "bins and balls" model, where you throw balls uniformly at random into M bins. This allows us to directly carry across results from combinatorial probability. Some famous problems include:
* *Birthday problem* - You'd expect two balls in the same bin after ~(pi * M / 2)^0.5 tosses
* *Coupon collector* - You'd expect every bin to have >= 1 ball after ~ M ln M tosses.
* *Load balancing* - After M tosses, expect the most loaded bin has Theta(log M / (log log M)) balls