# 10.0 - Geometric Applications of BSTs

In this lecture, we'll be looking at geometric applications of elementary symbol tables and the binary search tree data structure.

More specifically, we'll be looking at geometrical objects. Example applications might include:
* Seeing which points on a plane intersect a rectangle we specify. This is called a **2D Orthogonal Range Search**
* Seeing which rectangles in a set intersect with each other. (**Orthogonal rectangle intersection**)

Both of these problems have a vast range of applications, including CAD, games, movies, VR and even databases (where the rectangle is an abstraction). BSTs and extensions of them can be used to find efficient solutions to these problems.

## 1D Range Search

The very first problem we'll be looking at is called the 1d range search. The API for this problem is an extension of the ordered symbol table's API. The functions we need to be able to support are:
* Insertion of a key-value pair
* Searcing for a key *k*
* Deleting a key *k*
* **Range Search:** find all keys between `k1` and `k2`
* **Range Count:** find the number of keys between `k1` and `k2`

A vital application of this problem is in database queries.

For a geometric interpretation of this problem, we can consider the keys as *points on a line*. Our goal is to find/count the points in a given 1-dimensional interval.

## Implementations

There are a range of implementations that would solve this problem. They include:
* **Unordered Array** - Constant insertion, `O(N)` range count and range search
* **Ordered Array** - `O(N)` insertion, `O(log N)` range count and `O(R + log N)` range search, where R is the number of keys that match. (log N because you can use binary search)

Both of those implementations suffer from the fact that one of their critical operations takes linear time. Our goal is for every one of the operations to take time logarithmic in N (search will also be linear in R because you definitionally have to touch every key you return).

### Binary Search Tree Implementation

The most obvious implementation of this is simply to use a BST. Indeed, doing so makes range count trivial, because we already implemented a `rank` function which tells us how many keys there are in the tree less than the current one. To implement the range count, we just need to apply some subtraction:

```Java
public int size(Key lo, Key hi) {
  if (contains(hi)) return rank(hi) - rank(lo) + 1;
  else return rank(hi) - rank(lo);
}
```

Because rank is `O(log N)`, `size` is as well.

The range search is a little more complicated, but only marginally. We use recursion, as normal. Our recursive algorithm is, for a node `k`:
* Recursively find all keys in left subtree (if any could fall in range)
* Check the key in the current node
* Recursively find all keys in the right subtree (if any could fall in range)

You can see easily that the runtime of this function will be O(R + log N)

