# 10.3 - Interval Search Trees

In this note, we'll be looking at another extension of geometric algorithms to process a slightly more complex object.

## Interval Search

The interval search is a data structure we'll build to hold a set of (overlapping) intervals. The API we need this data structure to support is:
* Insert an interval (`lo`, `hi`)
* Search for an interval (`lo`, `hi`)
* Delete an interval (`lo`, `hi`)
* **Interval intersection query** given an interval (`lo`, `hi`), find all intervals in the data structure that intersect (`lo`, `hi`)

In Java, that looks like:

```Java
public class IntervalST<Key extends Comparable<Key>, Value> {
  IntervalST();
  void put(Key lo, Key hi, Value val);
  Value get(Key lo, Key hi);
  void delete(Key lo, Key hi);
  Iterable<Value> intersects(Key lo, Key hi);
}
```

We'll again make the non-degeneracy assumption, which in this context means we expect no two intervals to have the same left endpoint.

## Interval Search Trees

The data structure we'll need to solve this problem is called an interval search tree.

To start with, this is a BST where each node stores an interval (`lo`, `hi`).
* Use the left endpoint as the BST key
* We'll also store in each node the maximum endpoint in subtree rooted at that node.

### Insertion

To insert an interval (`lo`, `hi`):
* Insert into the BST, using `lo` as the key.
* Update the max in each node on the search path.

### Interval intersection search - 1 item

This is definitely a more complicated and less intuitive algorithm. To start with, we'll only return the first intersection we find.

To search for any one interval that intersects the query interval (`lo`, `hi`):
* If the interval in the node intersects the query interval, return it
* Else if left subtree is null go right
* Else if max endpoint in left subtree is less than `lo` go right
* Else go left.

This algorithm does mean that if we have an intersection in both the left and right subtrees, we'll always pick the one in the left subtree.

In code, it looks like:

```Java
Node x = root;
while (x != null) {
  if (x.interval.intersects(lo, hi)) return x.interval;
  else if (x.left == null)  x = x.right;
  else if (x.left.max < lo) x = x.right;
  else                      x = x.left;
}
return null;
```

Finally, to guarantee performace, we can use a red-black BST. This will make all our operations `O(log N)`, except for a multiple interval search, which will just become `O(RlogN)` where `R` is the number of intersections.