# 6.1 - Selection

We'll now look at a problem that is well-solved by Quicksort's partitioning approach.

Our problem is as follows:

> Given an array of N items, find the kth largest
> For example, the min (k=0), the max (k=N) or the median (k=N/2)
> 

Applications for this problem include:
* Order statistics
* Finding the 'top k'.

## Theory

This is an example of a problem where we can use theory as a guide to help us. Let's ask some questions:

> Q: What's the upper bound?
> A: Clearly, **NlgN**. We could use Quicksort to sort the array and then just iterate through to the kth element
> 

> Q: What's the upper bound for k=1,2,3?
> A: **N**, because for such a small k, we can just do k-passes of the array to determine the right element.
> 

> Q: What's the lower bound?
> A: Clearly **N**, as we have to touch every element to determine any element's relative position.

As a result, the question we're left with is:
> Is there a selection algorithm with O(N)?
> 

Problems like this were relevant to computer research in the late 60s and early 70s.

## Quick-Select

In 1961, Hoare himself solved this problem by introducing an algorithm known as Quick-select. The algorithm is essentially the same as Quicksort, the only difference being that instead of sorting both subarrays, we only sort the subarray of the half that we are interested in. We stop the algorithm when our index `j` is equal to the supplied index `k`.

The code for this looks like:

```Java
public static Comparable select(Comparable[] a, int k) {
  StdRandom.shuffle(a);
  int lo = 0; hi = a.length - 1;
  while (hi > lo) {
    int j = partition(a, lo, hi);
    if (j < k)      lo = j + 1;
    else if (j > k) hi = j - 1;
    else            return a[k];
  }
  return a[k];
}
```

## Analysis

Our proposition here is that Quick-select takes linear time on average. We won't do the full proof here (it's pretty complicated), but intuitively, we can see that each partition breaks the array down roughly in half. If we assume for simplicity that it breaks it exactly in half, then we get:

```
N + N/2 + N/4 + N/8 + ... + 1 ~ 2N Compares
```

A full formal analysis yields that:

```
C_N = 2N + 2k ln(N/k) + 2(N-k) ln(N/(N-k))
```

which is clearly O(N). As an aside, the maximum value this equation can take is when k = N/2, in which case C_N = (2 + 2ln2)N.

Note that the **worst-case** is actualy N^2, but that the shuffle makes this probalistically impossible. Nonetheless, that's somewhat theoretically unsatisfying, and in 1973, 5 researchers found a compare-based running algorithm whose worst-case running time is linear. Theoretically, this was a break through, though, in practice the constants this method has are too high to make it useful in practice.

Until something else is discovered, use Quick-select.