# 6.3 - System Sorts

Sorting algorithms are used in a broad range of applications. Anything that requires ordering is an obvious choice (e.g. an MP3 library, an RSS feed or an education app with course content). 

However, they also have a much larger application. In some problems, we can use sorting to simplify the problem. For instance: 
* finding the median
* doing a binary search of a database
* identifying statistical outliers 
* identifying duplicates in a mailing list

Then there are also a variety of non-obvious applications for sorting. Thes include:
* data compression
* computer graphics
* computation biology
* load balancing on a parallel computer

Because sorting is such a key piece of functionality, all programming languages worth their salt implement sorting algorithms. Java is no exception.

## Java System Sorts

Java has an `Arrays.sort()` which is intended to be a general-purpose sort. Underneath the hood however, it does a variety of different things.
* It has a method that implements `Comparable`.
* It has a method that implements `Comparator`.
* It uses a tuned Quicksort for primitive types.
* It uses a tuned mergesort for objects.

Note that to implement Arrays.sort you have to `import Java.util.Arrays`

Why use different arrays for different types? Ultimately this is a question for the designers of Java. One possible reason is that they assumed that if the developer is using objects, stability is much more of a concern. In addition, mergesort guarantees `nlogn` performance. 

On the other hand, with primitive types stability is not a concern. In addition, Quicksort uses less memory and is faster, so it makes sense to use it.

## War Story

As previously discussed, the Unix system sort was discovered in 1991 to have a variety of key problems, including using quadratic time on arrays with many duplicate keys. The discovery of these flaws led to the discovery of the 3-way partitioning quicksort (the production version is a little more complex than what we looked at).

In addition, this algorithm used 3 different ways of finding the partitioning element depending on array size. They were:
* Small arrays - Use the first element
* Medium arrays - Use the median of 3 elements
* Large arrays - Tukey's ninther, where you take the median of of the median of 3 samples, each of 3 entries.

This produces better partitioning than a random shuffle and is less costly.

## Java System Sort Achilles Heel

You'd think that with all this research, the Java system sort would be solid. But it turns out that there is a killer input that will actually crash the program by overflowing Java's function call stack. Even if it didn't crash the program, it would still take quadratic time.

The reason for this is that they didn't do the random shuffling. Without this degree of randomness, during the sort you can find an input that will crash the sort. Shuffling is required for a performance guarantee.

## Which algorithm should we choose?

Obviously, this is a question with no right answer. There's a huge number to choose from, and the right answer will vary from application to application. Questions to consider include:

* Stable?
* Parallel?
* Deterministic?
* Keys all distinct?
* Multiple key types?
* Linked lists or arrays?
* Large or small items?
* Is your array randomly ordered?
* Need guaranteed performance?

No one algorithm will guarantee these properties. On the bright side, the system sort is usually good enough, and will solve your problem.