# 12.0 - Symbol Table Applications - Sets

In this lecture, we'll take a look at how symbol tables can be used in client programs to solve practical problems.

The first application we'll have a look at is the Set.

## Set

A mathematical set is simply a collection of **distinct** keys. As a program, it has a very simple API:

```Java
public class Set<Key extends Comparable<Key>> {
                SET();             // create an empty set
  void          add(Key key);      // add the key to the set
  boolean       contains(Key key); // is the key in the set?
  void          remove(Key key);   // remove the key from the set
  int           size();            // return the number of keys in the set
  Iterator<Key> iterator()         // iterate over the keys in the set
}
```

Note that this API is simpler than the Symbol Table API, because we don't have to deal with the concept of associated values.

## Implementing

Implementing a set is very straightforward; all you have to do is remove the "value" from any ST implementation. The features of the set, like the fact that all keys need to be distinct, appear naturally from the simplementation.

## Uses - Exception Filter

One common use of a Set is as an exception filter. In essence, this boils down to keeping a list of words (your "exceptional words"), and then iterating through a (larger) file of words. There are two complementary implementations of the behaviour that follows:

* **Blacklist** - If your filter is acting as a blacklist, then you would print out all words in the file that don't appear in the list
* **Whitelist** - If your filter instead acts as a whitelist, you'd only print out words in the file that match words in your filter.

### Example Uses

There are many applications of exception filters. A few are listed below.

* **Spell checker** - Use your exception filter to identify misspelled words. (In this implementation, your list of words is the dictionary, and you blacklist words that do not appear in it.)
* **Browser history** - You can also use an exception filter to mark visited pages.
* **Parental controls** - You could use the exception filter to blacklist sites parents don't want their kids to see.
* **Chess** - Interestingly, you could also use an exception filter in Chess to look for board positions that indicate a draw has been reached
* **Spam Filter** - Collect email addresses that send spam and blacklist them
* **Credit Card Fraud** - Keep a list of stolen cards so that you can identify people who are using them.

### Implementation

We can implement an exception filter with remarkably few lines of code.

```Java
public class WhiteList {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    Set<String> set = new Set<String>();
    
    In in = new In(args[0]);
    while (!in.isEmpty())
      set.add(in.readString());
    
    while (!StdIn.isEmpty()) {
      String word = StdIn.readString();
      if (set.contains(word))
        StdOut.println(word);
    }
  }
}
```

Changing this to a blacklist is as simple as negating the condition on line 11.