# 1.0: Union-Find - Dynamic Connectivity

In this lecture, we'll be looking at the steps to develop a useful algorithm, using the dynamic connectivity problem and the union-find algorithm as our examples.

## Dynamic Connectivity

Given a set of N objects with connections randomly between them, is there a path connecting two arbitrary objects?

Today's algorithm isn't going to be able to tell us a path, but it will give us a yes/no answer to the above question.

We're assuming here that 'is connected to' is an equivalence relation, i.e. its:
* **Reflexive** - p is connected to p 
* **Symmetric** - if p is connected to q, q is connected to p
* **Transitive** - if p is connected to q and q is connected to r, p is connected to r.

When you have equivalence relations, you also get connected components, which are the maximal sets of objects that are mutually connected. Our algorithms will become more efficient if we use the knowledge of connected components.

### Implementing the operations

We have 2 operations we're trying to implement:
* **Find** - which checks if two objects are in the same connected component
* **Union** - which replaces the connected components containing the two objects with their union.

i.e if we have the connected components {0}, {1 4 5}, {2 3 6 7}, and we call union(0,1), our connected components become {0 1 4 5} and {2 3 6 7}

### The goal

Design an efficient data structure for union-find, bearing in mind that both the number of objects and the number of operations can be huge.

Our interface for our class would look like:

```Java
interface IUF {
  IUF(int N)
  void union(int p, int q)
  boolean connected(int p, int q)
}
```

We'll also be making a client to read in input files to construct our data set. This will look like:

```Java
public static void main(String[] args)
{
  int N = StdIn.readInt();
  UF uf = new UF(N);
  while (!StdIn.isEmpty())
  {
    int p = StdIn.readInt();
    int q = StdIn.readInt();
    if (!uf.connected(p, q))
    {
      uf.union(p,q);
      StdOut.println(P + " " + q)
    }
  }
}
```
Our input files will have a form like the one shown below. The first number is N, the remaining pairs indicate unions:
```
% tinyUF.txt
10
4 3
3 8
6 5
9 4
2 1
8 9
...
```