# 3.0 - Stacks

## Intro

In this lecture we'll be looking at 3 fundamental data types, **bags**, **queues** and **stacks**.

In most of these collection types, we have a collection that we want to be able to add and remove from, and iterate over.

The primary difference between stacks and queues are which item we remove:

* **Queues** are FIFO - "first in, first out". Think of a standard queue at, say, a bank. The add and remove operations are called **enqueue** and **dequeue** respectively

* **Stacks** are LIFO - "last in, first out". Think of a stack of plates. The add and remove operations are called **push** and **pop** respectively.

We'll also be use this lecture to take a look at modular programming. Basic compsci stuff here, but to review, the premise is that:
* The client doesn't and cannot know details of how the implementation works. It has multiple different implementations from which it can choose.
* The implementation doesn't have any information on the client's reqirements. Many clients can reuse the same implementation in different contexts.

We thus create libraries we can use to tackle more complex problems. It also lets us focus more on performance.

## Stacks API

The basic interface of a Stack is:

```Java
public interface StringStack {
  StringStack();
  void push(String item);
  String pop();
  boolean isEmpty();
  //optional
  int size();
}
```

Before we implement this, we'll go ahead and implement a basic client, to (in this case), reverse the order of items in the arguments.

```Java
public static void main(String[] args) {
  StringStack stack = new StringStack();
  
  while (!StdIn().isEmpty()) {
    
    String s = StdIn.readString();
    if (s.equals("-")) {
      StdOut.print(stack.pop());
    } else {
      stack.push(s);
    }
  }
}
```

For a file of the form:
`to be or not to - be - - that - - - is`

the output would be:

`to be not that or be`

## Linked List implementation

Out first implememention uses linked lists. This data type is deserving of a more thorough look through, but the basic premise is that each element is a node that contains a value and points to the next value in the list. A doubly linked list also points to the previous item.

In the case of our stack, the stack will be stored as a Linked List in the background. Pushing and popping is just a matter or adding and removing an item to the front (which is an O(1) operation in a linked list).

This implementation is the following:

```Java
public class LinkedStringStack {
  private Node first = null;
  
  private class Node {
    String item;
    Node next;
  }
  
  void push (String item) {
    Node newFirst = new Node();
    newFirst.item = item;
    newFirst.next = first;
    first = newFirst;
  }
  
  String pop() {
    Node oldFirst = first;
    first = oldFirst.next;
    return oldFirst.item;
  }
  
  boolean isEmpty() {
    return first == null;
  }
  
  int size() {
    let count = 0;
    let currentNode = first;
    while (currentNode != null) {
      count ++;
      currentNode = currentNode.next;
    }
  }
}
```

We can see that in this class every operation takes constant (`O(1)`) time, with the exception of the size operation, which, in our initial implementation takes `O(n)` time, the same as in a standard linked list. We could improve this by storing and incrementing/decrementing a count in our push and pop operations.

With regards to space usage, this depends a lot on implementation and machine. But in Java, our space usage can be totted up as:
* 16 bytes - object overhead
* 8 bytes - inner class extra overhead
* 8 bytes - reference to the String
* 8 bytes - reference to the next Node

Which comes to **40 bytes per Stack Node** (plus the length of the String itself, but this is owned by the client).

## Array Implementation

Our LinkedList implementation is fast, but we can do faster. And because Stacks are such a fundamental data structure, it would behoove us to speed matters up.

Incidentally, this choice between using arrays and linked list data structures is a common one that we will need to make throughout this course. So it will do us good to analyse it in a little more detail now.

For an array-based implementation, all we need is an array to store N items. Pushing adds an item at s[N], and popping one removes the item at s[N-1]. The only difficulty here is that there is scope for the stack to overflow when N exceeds our array's capacity. Again, this is a case we'll need to handle frequently. We'll see later on that the appropriate way to do this is with a resizing array.

Forgetting about our size defect for the moment, implementing a stack using an array is pretty simple (the incrementing and decrementing of N at the same time we access array elements is a sneaky Java feature):

```Java
public class FixedCapacityArrayStringStack {
  private String[] s;
  private int N = 0;
  
  private FixedCapacityArrayStringStack(int capacity) {
    s = new String[capacity];
  }
  
  public boolean isEmpty() {
    return N == 0;
  }
  
  public void push(String item) {
    // Index into the array, then increment it
    s[N++] = item;
  }
  
  public String pop() {
    // decrement N, then index with it.
    
    // This version loiters
    // return s[--N];
    
    //This version does not
    String item = s[--N];
    s[N] = null;
    return item;
  }
}
```

Remember that the capacity we're forcing the client to supply here is a cheat. Normally, this is too onerous a requirement for the client.

## Extra Considerations - Array Implementation

* Underflow - What if we pop from an empty stack (this also applies to a LinkedList)? We probably want to add an error of some kind.
* Overflow - Resizing arrays issue mentioned earlier
* Null items - We're allowing them to be inserted at the moment. Desirable?
* Loitering - holding a reference to an object when it is no longer needed. This is happening in our pop method. To rectify this, we add a few lines of code, which allows the Garbage Collector to reclaim the memory.