# 3.1 - Resizing Arrays

In our initial array implementation of stacks, we discovered an issue surrounding the idea of overflow. Now, we'll look at how we resolve this issue.

Our fundamental problem is **How do we grow and shrink an array?**

## Naive Implementation

The naive implementation is to increase and decrease the size of the array by 1 with every added and removed item respectively. While this would work, it is far too expensive, with every insert and removal taking time proportianal to the current array size. Thus, adding N items would take time proportional to:

1 + 2 + ... + N ~ N^2 / 2

Not, in any way, acceptable

## Repeated Doubling

The correct way of approaching this problem is to have the size of the array double each time it fills up. This is called repeated doubling. A simple implementation would look like:

```Java
public class ResizingArrayStringStack {
  int N = 0;
  String[] s;
  
  public ResizingArrayStringStack() {
    s = new String[1];
  }

  public void push(String item) {
    if (N == s.length) resizeArray(2 * s.length);
    s[N++] = item;
  }

  private void resize(int capacity) {
    String[] newS = String[capacity];

    for (int i = 0; i < s.length; i++) {
      newS[i] = s[i];
    }

    s = newS;
  }

  // old implementations of pop and isEmpty continue to be valid
}
```

The consequence of this method is that inserting the first N items takes a time proportional to N (rather than N^2), as you only pay the full cost of doubling the array when N is a power of two. 

To see this consider adding to an array from just after a doubling to the next doubling. 
* N = 2^x
* index of first insertion = 2^(x-1) 
* Thus, you will have (N/2 -1) constant insertions, and one insertion of cost N. 
* Thus, you pay approximately 3N/2 to double the size of the array. 

It follows logically (I can't be bothered to do the proper proof by induction) that the total time will take ~3N, and is thus proportional to N.

Thus, the **amortized insertion time** of a single item is O(N)/N ~ O(1).

## Shrinking the Array

How do we go about shrinking the array? Intuitively, it might make sense that we simply half the size of the array at when it is more than half empty. Unfortunately, the worst case scenario for this operation is too expensive. That worst case is if we push-pop-push-pop... (called **thrashing**) when the array is full. Each operation would take time proportional to N. 

The efficient solution is to wait til the array is **one quarter full** before you **halve it**. In this way, we maintain our amortized constant removal time.

Thus, we have an implementation of the Stack API where each of the operations takes constant amortized time, and takes up an amount of space that is guaranteed to be proportional to the number of items N.

## Space Efficiency of an Array Based Solution

For an array based implementation of the Stack, our stack can be calculated to take up between 8N (for a full array) and 32N (for a quarter-full array) bytes for a stack of N items.

## Comparing Arrays and Linked Lists

Thus, we've found we can effectively implement stacks using either arrays or linked lists. Which is better?

For **Linked Lists:**
* Operations take constant time in the *worst case*.
* They use extra space and time in the worst case (so they'll be slower).

For **arrays:**
* Operations take constant *amortized* time.
* Less space is wasted.

As you'd expect, there is no right answer, it depends on the needs of the specific client. Different clients will have different requirements.