# 3.3 - Generics

Next up, we're going to look at expanding our implementations to be able to handle data types other than Strings.

The most naive approach is to copy and paste your class for each different type of data. This is, obviously, very, very bad. Don't be copying and pasting your code, it's impossible to maintain. (Though, lol, this was the only option in the beginning of Java).

The second option is to implement your data types for type `Object`. Everything is a subtype of object, so you can simply cast your result. Again, this is not great, for two reasons:
1. You're forcing your client to do casting, which is an implementation detail it shouldn't be concerned with.
2. Casting is error-prone, and triggers runtime crashes when it fails. (Though it doensn't in Swift if you're clever. Woop :P)

Option 3 is the fun one, using Generics. This lets us discover any mistakes at compile time rather than runtime, which is a considerable improvement. In general, in all programming, **welcome compile-time errors, avoid runtime errors**.

Implementing Generics is actually pretty easy. Here's the LinkedList implementation of a Stack, with comments showing where we've edited the class to use generics. The only changes are to method signatures and the Node inner class:

```Java
public class LinkedStack<Item> {
  private Node first = null;
  
  private class Node {
    Item item; //String -> Item
    Node next;
  }
  
  void push (Item item) { //String -> Item
    Node newFirst = new Node();
    newFirst.item = item;
    newFirst.next = first;
    first = newFirst;
  }
  
  Item pop() { //String -> Item
    Node oldFirst = first;
    first = oldFirst.next;
    return oldFirst.item;
  }
  
  boolean isEmpty() {
    return first == null;
  }
}
```

With arrays, life is a little trickier, because in principle, what we want is an array of our generic type, and Java does not allow generic array creation (For technical reasons we won't go into). The solution is to cast an array of objects. This is suboptimal (runtime errors!), but you don't really have a choice. We'll demonstrate it on the FixedCapacityStack:

```Java
public class FixedCapacityStack<Item> {
  private Item[] s; //String -> Item
  private int N = 0;
  
  private FixedCapacityArrayStringStack(int capacity) {
    s = (Item[]) new Object[capacity]; //Ugly cast to Item[]
  }
  
  public boolean isEmpty() {
    return N == 0;
  }
  
  public void push(Item item) { //String -> Item
    s[N++] = item;
  }
  
  public Item pop() { //String -> Item
    Item item = s[--N]; //String -> Item
    s[N] = null;
    return item;
  }
}
```

Unfortunately, the casting of the array in the initializer actually causes a linting warning when you compile your code. Pain in the backside. We'll have to power through.

## Autoboxing

What about primitive types?

In Java, primitive types, and the object based types like String are actually distinct entities. Luckily, Java accounts for this:
* Every primitive type has a `wrapper` object type, e.g. `Integer` is a wrapper type for `Int`
* Java also has **autoboxing** which automatically casts between a primitive type and its wrapper. In practice this does behind-the-scenes casting which looks like:

```Java
Stack<Integer> s = new Stack<Integer>();
s.push(17); // s.push(new Integer(17));
int a = s.pop(); // int a = s.pop().intValue();
```