# 3.5 - Stack and Queue Implementations

The first thing that's worth noting is that the Java collection libraries actually mentions these basic data types. For instance, Java has a `List<Item>` type that implements add, remove and so on using a resizing array. Plus, its already iterable. So why not just use these?

Well, part of the problems is that these classes are often unnecessarily complex. For instance, Java's `java.util.Stack` class, in addition to supporting push and pop, also implements all the methods in the `List` interface, which is unnecessary, and makes it difficult to accurately predict the performance of your class.

In addition, `java.util.Queue` is an interface, not an implementation of a queue.

For the moment, it is probably best to use classes you've made yourself. If you do want to use Java's inbuilt classes, make sure you devote time to learn how they really work. Here be dragons. (Then again, you are a professional, so don't be unnecessarily terrified. Just careful).

## Stack Applications

Stacks are used in a vast range of places, including:
* Parsing in a compiler
* JVM
* Undo in a word processor
* Back button in a web browser
* PostScript language for printers
* Implementing function calls in a compiler

### Compiler Function Calls

When a function is called, the compiler handles this by `push`ing the local environment and the return address. When the function then returns, it `pop`s the return address and the local environment. This actually allows us to handle recursive function calls, where a function calls itself. You have to be careful with them though, as they bloat your program's Call Stack.

Note that you can always use an explicit stack to remove recursion on your call stack.

An interesting example is Djikstra's two-stack algorithm for arithmetic expression evaluation. In brief, the algorithm works as follows:

> Maintain two stacks, one for values and one for operators. When evaluating an arithmetic expression from left to right, there are 4 potential inputs you can receive, and 4 corresponding actions. They are:
> * Value - Push onto the value stack
> * Operator - Push onto the operator stack
> * Left Parenthesis - Ignore
> * Right Parenthesis - Pop operator and two values, push the result of applying the operator on those values to the value stack
> 
> The lecture contains an example of this in action, as well as some demo code. We won't replicate it here.
> 

