# 5.0 - Mergesort

In this lecture, we'll spend the entire lecture looking at mergesort, one of the critical components of the world's computational architecture. Thanks to a full scientific understanding of both this sorting mechanism and quicksort, we have been able to develop them into practical system sorts.

(Quicksort, which we'll consider next time, has actually been honored as one of the 10 best algorithms of the 20th century.)

## Algorithm

The merge sort algorithm is conceptually very simple. All we do is split our array in half, recursively sort each half, and then merge the halves.

### Merging subarrays

The first question we much resolve is, given two sorted subarrays a[lo]-a[mid] and a[mid+1]-a[hi], replace them with a sorted subarray a[lo]-a[hi].

The easiest way to do this is use an *auxiliary array*. Our alogirithm for doing this is:
1. Copy the data from the passed arrays into an auxiliary array.
2. Initialise 3 indices:
   * i - which indexes from aux[lo]-aux[mid]
   * j - which indexes from aux[mid+1]-aux[hi]
   * k - which indexes into our final array (which is the array that was passed in)
3. Compare aux[i] and aux[j]. Copy whichever item is lower into a[k].
4. Increment k and i or j (whichever element was copied)
5. Repeat steps 3 or 4 until one of the aux arrays is emptied.
6. Copy the remaining aux array into a.

Thus we arrive at the code for merging.

```Java
public class Merge {
  public static void merge(Comparable[] a, Comparable[] aux, int lo, int mid, int hi) {
    arrest(isSorted(a, lo, mid)); //precondition
    arrest(isSorted(a, mid+1, hi)); //precondition
    
    for (int l = lo; l <= hi; l++) {
      aux[l] = a[l];
    }
    
    int i = lo, j = mid+1;
    
    for (int k = 0; k <= hi; k++) {
      if      (i > mid)              a[k] = aux[j++];
      else if (j > hi)               a[k] = aux[i++];
      else if (less(aux[j], aux[i])) a[k] = aux[j++];
      else                           a[k] = aux[i++];
    }
    
    assert isSorted(a, lo, hi); //postcondition
  }
  
  //less implemented as before
}
```

### Assertions

This is the first time we've used assertions in our code. The goal of these assertions is both to test and and document our code. (Note that I'm not sure if they're in vogue now. I've been advised to avoid the Swift equivalents).

In Java, the assert statement takes a boolean condition, and returns if the condition is false it throws an exception.

Note that assertions can be enabled and disabled in your program. They are usually disabled in production code, and so incur no cost in production code. Best practice is to treat them as such.

### The Full Picture

Now that we have our code for merging subarrays, it is a relatively simple matter to extend it for the full merge.

```Java
publc class Merge {
  private static void merge(...) {
    /* as before */
  }
  
  private static void sort(Comparable[] a, Comparable[] aux, int lo, int hi) {
    if (hi <= lo) return; //Critical, breaks our recursion for arrays length 1.
    int mid = lo + (hi - lo) / 2;
    sort (a, aux, lo, mid);
    sort (a, aux, mid + 1, hi);
    merge(a, aux, lo, mid, hi);
  }
  
  public static void sort(Comparable[] a) {
    Comparable[] aux = new Comparable[a.length]; //Important to do this outside the recursion 
    sort(a, aux, 0, a.length - 1);
  }
  
  //less as before
}
```