# 5.1 - Mergesort Analysis

Mergesort is a very efficient algorithm. For comparisons sake, if you were to sort an array of a billion items on your laptop (10^8 compares per second):
* With **insertion** sort, it would take 317 years.
* With **merge**sort, it would take 18 minutes.

This again reinforces our central theme that a good algorithm is much more effective than buying a super computer.

## Divide-and-conquer recurrence proof

For our analysis of mergesort's time complexity, we propose that it uses **at most** NlgN compares, and 6 NlgN accesses.

To sketch this proof out, we write out a recurrence relation. Let:
* C(N) denote the number of compares we need to sort an  array of size N
* A(N) to denote the number of array accesses to sort an  array of size N

Thus, we can write out:

> C(N) <= C(N/2) + C(N/2) + N for N>1
> C(1) = 0 
> Where each of the C(N/2) comes from sorting the individual halves, and the N comes from the single `less` comparison nested in the `merge` `for` loop.
> 
and
> A(N) <= A(N/2) + A(N/2) + 6N
> Where the half elements again come from sorting the subarrays, and the 6N come from the 6 array comparisons in `merge`, which are:
> * 2 from the copying of items into aux
> * 2 from the inputs to the less operator (remember this is a worst case recurrence relation)
> * 2 from the copying of elements from aux into a.
> 

We can now solve these equations. For simplicity, we'll solve them for N being a power of 2. The result generalises neatly to other cases. The proof by induction goes:
```
D(N) = 2D(N/2) + N
     = 4D(N/4) + 2(N/2) + N = 4D(N/4) + 2N
     = (2^k)D(N/(2^k)) + kN
```
We know that D(1) = 0, so we continue adding terms until 2^k = N
Thus `k = lgN`
```
    = ND(1) + NlgN
    = NlgN
```

## Space Complexity

Our current implementation we can easily see uses up extra space proportional to `N`, for the creation of the auxiliary array.

As an aside, note that we can define an **in-place** sorting mechanism as one which uses `<= c lgN` memory. The other sorting mechanisms we saw (selection sort, insertion sort, shellsort) were all in-place merges.

It is also theoretically possible to do an in-place merge ([Konrad, 1969]), but in practice these methods are too complicated to be of practical use. Finding a simple way to do this is still an open problem.