# 7.0 - Priority Queues

In this lecture we'll be looking at priority queues. We'll start by looking at the API for a priority queue, and some elementary implementations.

So far, we've looked at `Stack`, `Queue` and `Bag`, data structures which are essentially identical in their behaviour when adding elements, but differ as to how they are removed.

A `PriorityQueue` is analogous to these data types. As before, we can add items to the queue. The difference in this data type is that when we remove an item, we remove the **largest** (or **smallest**) item.

## API

Our API looks very similar to APIs for our Stack and Queue data types. The only key difference is that (using `Java` syntax), our generic items must be `Comparable`. Our API looks like:

```Java
public protocol MaxPQ<Key extends Comparable<Key>> {
  
  // required methods
  
  MaxPQ();               // initialiser
  
  void    insert(Key v); // insert a key
  Key     delMax();      // remove and return the largest key
  boolean isEmpty();     // check is the queue is empty.
  
  // additional optional methods
  MaxPQ(Key[] a);        // initialiser with given keys
  
  Key max();             // return the largest key
  int size();            // number of entries in the priority queue
}
```

Obviously, this implementation could be adapted to create a minimum priority queue.

## Applications

There are a variety of problems that the priority queue is ideally suited to tackle. These cover a wide range of disciplines, which include:

* Event-driven simulation - e.g. customers in a line, colliding particles
* Numerical computation - e.g. reducing roundoff error
* Data compression - e.g. Hufman codes
* Graph searching - e.g. Djikstra's algorithm, Prim's algorithm
* Number theory - e.g. sum of powers
* Artificial intelligence - e.g. A* search
* Statistics - e.g. Maintain largest M values in a sequence
* Operating systems - e.g. load balancing, interrupt handling
* Discrete optimization - e.g. bin packing, scheduling
* Spam filtering - e.g. Bayesian spam filter.

Indeed, a number of these applications are specific versions of a generic problem, which could be written as:

> We have data to process and we can't process it all at once. We have to save some of it.

A priority queue lets us organise our data so that we can pick the best item to process next. This is an idea with wide-ranging implications.

In this lecture, we'll look more deeply at **event-driven simulation** to illustrate the applications of a priority queue.

## The Challenge

> Challenge: Find the largest `M` items in a stream of `N` items (where `N` is huge, and `M` is large).
> * Applications include fraud detection and file maintenance
> 
> Constraint: Not enough memory to store `N` items.

With a priority queue, this problem is relatively easy to solve. All we have to do is create a Minimum Priority Queue, and as each item comes in store it in the priority queue. If the number of items in the priority queue is greater than M, than we just delete the smallest item.

```Java
MinPQ<Transaction> pq = new MinPQ<Transaction>();

while (StdIn.hasNextLine()) {
  String line = StdIn.readLine();
  Transaction item = new Transaction(line);
  pq.insert(item);
  if(pq.size() > M)
    pq.delMin();
}
```

## Solving the Problem

The main problem we have to solve with a priority queue is of course "How do we find the largest item in the queue?". The challenge above adds an additional complications, in that we can only store `M` iterms. Let's consider a few potential solutions.

### Option 1 - Sorting

* Time - `NlogN`
* Space - `N`

One possible solution is to just sort the `N` items. However, the problem effectively rules out this solution; to sort `N` items, we need to be able to store `N` items. No-go.

### Option 2 - Elementary Priority Queue

* Time - `M N`
* Space - `M`

Another possible solution is to implement a very simple priority queue, which e.g. searches for the minimum item in the array whenever we want to delete an item. We'll look at some implementations which satisfy this condition, but a simple analysis will show that this is much too slow.

### Option 3 - Use a Binary Heap

* Time - `NlogM`
* Space - `M`

Finally, we'll look at using a data structure called a Binary Heap, which solves the problem in NlogM time, and only M space, which is pretty close to optimal.

## Elementary Solutions

Two elementary solutions to this problem involve storing your data in an array. They are:

1. Store the items in an **unordered** array (or linked list). When you want to remove an item, you will need to scan through the entire array to find the smallest item to remove
2. Store the items in an **ordered** array (or linked list). Removing an item is now easy, just remove the head. However, now to insert an item, you have to scan through the entire array to find the correct place to insert it.

Both of these solutions suffer from the problem that one of their core opertions (deleting and inserting respectively) takes linear time. The goal we'll aim for (and that our binary heap will provide) is for both operations to be completable in linearithmic time.
