# 7.1 - Binary Heaps

Binary heaps are a simple, but crucial data structure that will help us implement priority queues effectively. To use it, we will need to understand the concepts of a binary tree.

## Tree Definitions

> A **binary tree** is a tree data structure that is either empty, or has a node with links to left and right binary trees
> 

> A **complete tree** is a perfectly balanced binary tree, with the exception of its bottom level.
> 
> **Property** - The height of a complete tree with N nodes is lgN.
> To prove this, we note that the height of the tree only ever increases when N is a power of 2.
> 

## Binary Heap Representations

First, two more definitions:

> A **binary heap** is an array representation of a heap-ordered binary tree.
> 

> A **heap-ordered binary tree** is a tree which has:
> * Keys in its nodes
> * The parent's key is greater than or equal to its childrens' keys.
> 

To place our tree in an array, we simply:
1. Start our indices at 1 (i.e. leave the 0th element empty)
2. Take nodes in level order. (So the top element is at index 1, its left child is at index 2, its right child is at index 3, etc.)

A nice side effect of this way of placing the items in the array is that we need no explicit links between elements.

### Binary Heap Properties

1. The largest key is `a[1]`, which is the root of the binary tree
2. You can use the array indices to move around the tree:
   * The parent of a node at `k` is at `k/2`
   * The children of a node at `k` are at `2k` and `2k + 1`

## Scenarios

Having established the basic properties of a binary heap, let's see what happens when we violate these invariants and how we go about fixing them. Eventually, we'll put all these scenarios together to implement our priority queue.

### Promotion in a heap

**Scenario** - A child's key becomes larger than its parent's key.

The solution is:
1. Exchange the key in the child with the key in the parent
2. Repeat until the heap order is restored.

If it helps, you can think of this as analogous to the **Peter principle** in management, which observes that people in a heirarchy (or in this case, our node) are promoted to their level of incompetence.

This operation is called the `swim` operation. In code, it looks like:

```Java
private void swim(int k) {
  while (k > 1 && less(k/2, k)) {
    exch(k, k/2);
    k = k/2;
  }
}
```
#### Binary Heap Insertion

Naturally, this operation gives us a way of inserting an item into a binary heap. Simply place the element at the bottom of the heap and `swim` it up.

This will take at most `1 + lgN` compares.

```Java
public void insert(Key x) {
  pq[++N] = x;
  swim(N);
}
```

### Demotion in a heap

**Scenario** - A parent's key becomes smaller than one (or both) of its children.

The solution is:
1. Exchange the key in parent with the key in the **larger** child (as when you promote the child it has to be larger than its old sibling to maintain the invariant).
2. Repeat until heap order is restored.

The management equivalent here would be a **power struggle**, where the better subordinate (i.e. the larger key) gets promoted.

This operation is called the `sink` operation. In code:

```Java
private void sink(int k){
  while (2k <= N) {
    int j = 2*k;
    if(j < N && less(j, j+1)) j++;
    if(!less(k, j)) break;
    exch(k,j);
    k = j
  }
}
```

#### Binary Heap Delete Maximum

The sink operation lets us delete the maximum node in our heap. As we already know that the largest node in the heap is the one at the top of the heap (array index 1), all we have to do is exchange it with the last node in the heap, and sink that node down.

This will take at most `2lgN` compares.

```Java
public Key delMax() {
  Key max = pq[1];
  exch(1, N--); //N-- => ignore the node in sink
  sink(1);
  pq[N+1] = null; //prevent loitering
  return max;
}
```

## Code Implementation

A Binary Heap in code is remarkable simple:

```Java
private class MaxPQ<Key extends Comparable<Key>> {
  private Key[] pq;
  private int N;
  
  // could do the re-sizing array juggling if we wanted to
  public MaxPQ(int capacity) {
    pq = (Key[]) new Comparable[capacity+1];
  }
  
  public boolean isEmpty() {
    return N == 0;
  }
  
  public void insert(Key x) {
    pq[++N] = x;
    swim(N);
  }
  
  public Key delMax() {
    Key max = pq[1];
    exch(1, N--); //N-- => ignore the node in sink
    sink(1);
    pq[N+1] = null; //prevent loitering
    return max;
  }
  
  private void swim(int k) {
    while (k > 1 && less(k/2, k)) {
      exch(k, k/2);
      k = k/2;
    }
  }
  
  private void sink(int k){
    while (2k <= N) {
      int j = 2*k;
      if(j < N && less(j, j+1)) j++;
      if(!less(k, j)) break;
      exch(k,j);
      k = j
    }
  }
  
  private boolean less(int i, int j) {
    return pq[i].compareTo(pq[j]) < 0;
  }
  
  private void exch(int i, int j) {
    Key temp = pq[i];
    pq[i] = pq[j];
    pq[j] = temp;
  }
}
```

This data structure is excellent, because using it, we have implemented priority queues in a way that allow us to do both insert and delete in `logN` time.

As an aside, there are other data structures that have better theoretical results, but we use them much less in practice. One is a **d-ary heap** (rather than binary) which depending on the number of inserts compared with deletions can do better. Additionally, we also have the **Fibonacci heap** which offers O(1) insertion time and amortized O(logN) deletion time, but in practice it is too complicated for most uses.

## Considerations

### Immutability of Keys

A key detail with this implementation is that we've assumed that the client does not change keys while they're on the priority queue. If they did, our binary heap would become invalid. We can engineer this in practice by making the Keys **immutable**.

## Underflow and Overflow

We haven't discussed overflow and underflow:
* Underflow - we should throw an exception if deleting from an empty PQ
* Overflow - we should add a no-arg constructor and use resizing arrays

## Minimum-oriented priority queues

Almost identical to the maximum PQs. We provide a seperate implementation for clarity. To do so:
1. Replace `less()` with `greater()`
2. Implement `greater()`

## Other operations
There are instances when we'll want to be able to implement other operations including:
* Removing an arbitrary item
* Changing the priority of an item

Both of these operations can be achieved with our sink and swim methods. More details on how to come.

## Immutability in Java

An immutable data type is one that can't be changed once its been initialised. To do this, we:
* declare local variables as `private final`
* When provided with a mutable data type in an initialiser, defensively copy its instance variables.

We could advocate for immutability here, but this seems unnecessary. If you've forgotten Ivan, take a programming language course or read a blog post.




