# 7.2 - Heapsort

We'll now use our binary heap implementation to implement a clever sorting method call Heapsort.

The basic implementation is simple:
* Start with an array of keys in an arbitrary order
* Build a max-heap in-place
* Repeatedly remove the maximum key to have a sorted subarray in-place.

As both insertion and deletion of a single element are `O(logN)` and we have to both insert and delete each element, we can see intuitively that this sort will have a complexity of `O(NlogN)`. More detail at the end of this note.

## Constructing the Heap

How do we go about creating a heap in-place? We'll take a bottom up approach. Our approach will be:
* Ignore all the nodes on the bottom of the heap (they have no children and so are automatically heap-ordered)
* For the remaining nodes, go through and apply `sink` to each one from the end of the array backwards. At each `sink`, the only node that will not be heap ordered will be the root node of that sub-heap, so doing this will produce gradually larger heaps.

That ends the construction phase. In code:

```Java
for(int i = N/2; i>0; i--)
  sink(a, i, N);
```

## Sorting the Array

The sort phase is, if anything, even simpler than the construction. It is exactly analogous to the `delMax()` operation of a standard heap:

* Swap the heap's root with the last element of the heap
* Decrement N (i.e. no longer regard the last node as part of the heap)
* Sink the new root down.

Rinse and repeat until you have a sorted array. In code:

```Java
while (N > 1) {
  exch(a, 1, N--);
  sink(a, 1, N);
}
```

## Code implementation

```Java
public class Heap {
  public static void sort(Comparable[] pq) {
    int N = pq.length;
    
    for(int i = N/2; i>0; i--)
      sink(a, i, N);
    
    while (N > 1) {
      exch(a, 1, N--);
      sink(a, 1, N);
    }
  }
  
  private static void sink(Comparable[] pq, int k, int N) 
  { /* as before */ }
  
  private static boolean less(Comparable[] pq, int i, int j) 
  { /* as before, but converting from 1-based indexing to 0-based indexing */ }
  
  private static void exch(Comparable[] pq, int k, int j) 
  { /* as before, but converting from 1-based indexing to 0-based indexing */ }
}
```

## Mathematical Analysis

We note two interesting details:
> Heap *construction* uses `<= 2N` compares and exchanges

> *Heapsort* uses `<= 2NlgN` compares and exchanges

The heap construction point is a most interesting one, though tricky to prove; constructing a heap can be done in *linear* time.

### Significance

This is actually the **first** algorithm we've seen that sorts **in-place** in **worst-case NlogN** time.

* Mergesort needed linear extra space (in-place possible, but not practical)
* Quicksort had a quadratic time worst case (NlogN worst case possible but nor practical)

### However...

* The inner loop of Heapsort is longer than quicksort
* Heapsort makes a poor use of cache memory
* Heapsort isn't stable

As a result, heapsort isn't used a lot in industrial applications.
