# 8.0 - Elementary Symbol Tables

In the next few lectures we'll be looking at the symbol tables data structure, a fundamental data structure with a variety of implementations in different languages. We begin by looking at its API.

## Key-value pair abstraction

The fundamental operations we want a symbol table to perform are:
* Insert a value with a specified key.
* Given a key, search for the corresponding value.

Examples of this include:
* A DNS lookup table which associates URLs with IP addresses.
* The `dictionary` class in Swift (and, hence, also actual dictionaries)
* Web search (keywords and page names)
* Genomics (DNA string and known positions)
* File systems (filename and location on disk)
* Hundreds and hundreds of others. This is truly fundamental.

The most convenient way to set up a symbol table is to implement the **associative array abstraction**, which associates one value with each key. An concrete example of that abstraction is a simple integer array; the keys are the indices, and the values are the `int` values you store.

### API

The API for a symbol table then comes out as:

```Java
public interface ST<Key, Value> {
  ST();                         //initialiser
  void put(Key key, Value val); // Puts key value in table (remove key if value null)
  Value get(Key key);           // Lookup value paired with key (null if key is absent)
  void delete(Key key);         // Remove key (and its value) from table
  boolean contains(Key key);    // Is there a value paired with this key?
  boolean isEmpty();            // Is the table empty?
  int size();                   // How many ke-value pairs are stored in the table?
  Iterable<Key> keys();         // All the keys in the table
}

```

### Conventions

* Values are not `null`
* Method `get()` returns `null` if key is not present
* Method `put()` overwrites old value with new value 

The result of these conventions is that we can simplify several of our method implementations:
* `contains`:
  ```Java
  public boolean contains(Key key) {
    return get(key) != null;
  }
  ```
* Lazy `delete`:
  ```Java
  public void delete(Key key) {
    put(key, null); 
  }
  ```

## Assumptions

While we will allow `Value` to be absolutely any generic type, with `Key`, several natural assumptions arise. These present us with several different ways to implement our symbol table. The various possible assumptions are:
1. Assume keys are `Comparable`, using the `compareTo()` method. This will let us more efficiently search our table, and will allow us to support a larger array of very useful symbol table applications.
2. If the keys are not `Comparable`, we will assume keys are any generic type, use `equals` to test equality
3. As (2), but we can also use `hashCode()` to scramble the key and thus inject some randomness.

In addition, we will use **immutable** types for symbol table keys.

## Test Clients

### For Traces

We can build a simple test client by associating value `i` with the `ith` string from the standard input:

```Java
public static void main(String[] args) {
  ST<String, Integer> st = new ST<>();
  for (int i = 0; !StdIn.isEmpty(); i++) {
    String key = StdIn.readString();
    st.put(key, i);
  }
  for (String s : st.keys())
    StdOut.println(s + " " + st.get(s)); 
}
```

### For Analysis

For larger problems, we'll use a frequency counter client that reads a sequence of string from the standard input and prints out the one that occurs with the highest frequency. The output would look something like:

```
% java FrequencyCounter 1 < tinyTale.txt
it 10
```

This will allow us to make sure that our implementations operate efficiently (as it would take forever for large inputs). The implementation is 

```Java
public static void main(String[] args) {
  int minlen = Integer.parseInt(args[0]);
  ST<String, Integer> st = new ST<String, Integer>();
  while (!StdIn.isEmpty()) {
    String word = StdIn.readString();
    if (word.length() < minlen) continue;
    if (!st.contains(word)) st.put(word, 1);
    else                    st.put(word, st.get(word) + 1);
  }
  String max = "";
  st.put(max, 0);
  for (String word : st.keys())
    if (st.get(word) > st.get(max))
      max = word;
  StdOut.println(max + " " + st.get(max));
}
```