# 8.2 - Elementary Implementations

Now we'll look at some elementary implementations. These are all quite simple, and we won't spend a great deal of time on them. However, they will be useful in setting the stage for some of the more advanced implementations we'll consider later.

## Sequential Search in a Linked List

One option would be to store the key-value pairs in an ordered, or an un-ordered linked list. In this case, for both insertion and search, we'd have to scan through all keys looking for a match and replace/insert it or return it as appropriate.

Thus **both operations are O(N)**, and hence distinctly suboptimal. On the plus side, this does allow us to use any class that implements equals.

## Binary Search in an Ordered Array

In this option, we maintain two ordered arrays, one of keys and one of values. In this implementation, the ordered nature of the array allows us to use binary search (recursively look at the middle item, if key greater take right half, else take left half) to look for elements in O(log N) time.

The code for the `get` operation is:

```Java
public Value get(Key key) {
  if (isEmpty()) return null;
  int i = rank(key);
  if (i < N && keys[i].compareTo(key) == 0) return vals[i];
  else return null;
}

private int rank(Key key) {
  int lo = 0;
  int hi = N - 1;
  while (lo <= hi) {
    int mid = lo + (hi - lo) / 2;
    int cmp = key.compareTo(keys[mid]);
    if      (cmp < 0) hi = mid - 1;
    else if (cmp > 0) hi = mid + 1;
    else              return mid;
  }
  return lo;
}
```

The problem with this approach is that when we insert a new element, we have to move everything else over 1 position. Thus, in this approach, **search is O(lgN), insert is O(N)**

This is an efficient implementation of search, but what we really want is an efficient implementation of both operations. We'll see that in the next lecture.