# 8.4 - Binary Search Trees

In this note, we'll be taking a look at binary search trees, or BSTs, a fundamental data structure that will allow us to implement our symbol tables efficiently.

## Definition

With heaps, we discussed *implicit* trees that were stored in an array. With Binary Search Trees (or BSTs), we'll be discussing *explicit* trees.

A BST is a **binary tree** in **symmetric** order.

A **binary tree** is either:
* Empty
* Two disjoint binary trees (left and right)

**Symmetric Order** - each node has a key and every node's key is:
* Larger than all keys in its left subtree
* Smaller than all keys in its right subtree

## Representation in Java

In Java, we'll represent BSTs using a `Node` class. It will be comprised of 4 fields:
* `Key`
* `Value`
* A reference to its left subtree
* A reference to its right subtree

In code, that looks like:

```Java
private class Node {
  private Key key;
  private Value val;
  private Node left;
  private Node right;
  
  public Node(Key key, Value val) {
    this.key = key;
    this.val = val; 
  }
}
```

Remember that `Key` is `Comparable`

Thus we can whip up a simple skeleton implementation of our BST:

```Java
public class BST<Key extends Comparable<Key>, Value> {
  private Node root;
  
  private class Node { /* As above */ }
  public void put(Key key, Value val) { /* See later */ }
  public Value get(Key key) { /* See later */ }
  public void delete(Key key) { /* See later */ }
  public Iterable<Key> iterator() { /* See later */ }
}
```

## Search

Searching a BST is a simple matter of recursively following one rule:

> If less, go left. If greater, go right. If equal, search hit
 
In code, that looks like:

```Java
public Node get(Key key) {
  Node node = findNode(key);
  return node == null ? null : node.value;
}

private Node findNode(Key key) {
  Node current = root;
  while(current != null) {
    int cmp = key.compareTo(current.key);
    if      (cmp < 0) current = current.left;
    else if (cmp > 0) current = current.right;
    else              return current
  }
  return null;
}
```

The cost of this method is thus 1 + the depth of the tree.

## Insert

Insert is almost identical to search, the only difference here is that if we hit a null node, we create a new Node with the specified key and value, otherwise we overwrite it.

Having said that, this one is trickier to implement, because when looking for our insertion point, we need to have a reference to the parent node to handle the case where we insert the new node. The example implementation uses recurrence quite cleverly:

```Java
public void put(Key key, Value val) { 
  root = put(root, key, val);
}

private Node put(Node current, Key key, Value val) {
  if (current == null) return new Node(key, val);
  
  int cmp = key.compareTo(current.key);
  if (cmp < 0)
    x.left = put(x.left, key, val);
  else if (cmp > 0)
    x.right = put(x.right, key, val);
  else
    x.val = val;
  
  return x;
}
```

What does this method do? Well
* Each step of the method assigns either its left or right node, as appropriate, to the result of the next recursive call. After doing so, crucially, it *returns itself*
* This continues down the chain until one of two things happens. Either:
  * It finds a matching node, replaces its `val` and returns itself
  * If hits a `null`, creates a *new* node, and returns it.
* In going back up the chain then, each node is set to the node that it was previously, with the exception of the bottom-most node, which has either been created or updated.

The simplest case of this is the empty tree. In that case, that first call to `put` simply sets the new node to root.

The cost of this method is the same as the cost of `get`: 1 + the depth of the tree.

## Tree Shape

One of the more interesting features of binary search trees is that many BSTs can equivalently represent the same set of keys:
* In the *best case* we have a perfectly balanced binary tree
* In the *worst case* we have a 'tree' that is effectively a linked list; each node just references the next node in the list
* In the *typical* case, we are somewhere in the middle; our tree is branching, but there are unfilled nodes at various levels.

The shape of any given BST is determined by the *order of insertion*. In a later lecture, we'll look at ways to handle that base case.

## Remark on Quicksort

Interestingly, Binary search trees correspond perfectly to quicksort partitioning, with the node element representing the pivot element, and the left and right subtrees representing the left and right portions of the array. In the situation where there is no partitioning, there is a 1-1 correspondance between binary search trees and quicksort partitioning.

## Analysis

The aforementioned quicksort analogy allows us to carry across the results of our analysis on quicksort. Namely that:
> If N distinct keys are inserted into a BST in random order, the expected number of compares for a search/insert is ~2 ln N (this corresponds to the average path through the tree).

In a paper published in 2003 by Reed, it was actally shown that the expected height of the tree is ~4.311 ln N (this corresponds to the worst-case path through a tree).

Having said that, we still have the problem that the worst case search and inserts are still ~N. And unlike with sorting, we aren't able to randomise the keys, as the client provides them, and chooses their order. We'll look at ways to resolve that in the next lecture.