# 8.5 - Ordered Operations in BSTs

In this note, we'll be taking a look at ordered symbol table operations with a Binary Search Tree as our underlying mechanism.

## Minimum and Maximum

How do we find the minimum or maximum of a binary search tree? This is trivial; simply follow the left/right path down the binary tree til you hit `null`.

## Floor and Ceiling

As a reminder `floor` looks for the largest key <= a certain key, while `ceiling` looks for the smallest key >= a certain key.

These operations are a little more complicated. For floor, there are 3 cases we need to consider for a key `k`:
1. **k equals the root key** - In this case, the floor of `k` is `k`
2. **k is less than the key at root** - The floor of k is necessarily in the left subtree
3. **k is greater than the key at root** - The floor of k is in the right subtree, *if* there is any key <= k in the right subtree, otherwise it is the key in the root. Satisfying this condition requires applying floor recursively.

The code for `floor` thus looks like:

```Java
public Key floor(Key key) {
  Node x = floor(root, key);
  return x == null ? null : x.key;
}

private Node floor(Node current, Key key) {
  if (current == null) return null;
  
  int cmp = key.compareTo(current.key);
  
  if (cmp == 0) return current;
  if (cmp < 0)  return floor(current.left, key);
  
  Node rightFloor = floor(current.right, key);
  return rightFloor == null ? current : rightFloor;
}
```

The method above implements the 3 cases methioned sequentially. Case 1 is handled by the `cmp == 0` path, case 2 is handled by the `cmp < 0` path, and  case 3 by the final 2 lines of code in the method.

Ceiling is analagous, but with the inequalities flipped.

## `size` and Subtree Counts

To implement `size` (and facilitate the implementations of `rank` and `select`) we implement subtree counts. This is a simple mechanism whereby each node keeps track of the number of nodes in the subtree rooted by itself.

To do this, we extend Node to have a count variable:

```Java
private class Node {
  private Key key;
  private Value value;
  private Node left;
  private Node right;
  private int count;
  
  Node(Key key, Value val, int count) {
    this.key = key;
    this.val = val;
    this.count = count;
  }
}
```

and to get the size we simply return the root node's count:

```Java
public int size() {
  return size(root);
}

private int size(Node current) {
  if (current == null) return 0;
  return current.count;
}
```

To maintain our size counts, we'll simply add a line to our `put` method, and initialise the `Node` with a count of 1:

```Java
private Node put(Node current, Key key, Value val) {
  if (current == null) return new Node(key, val, 1);
  
//  int cmp = key.compareTo(current.key);
//  if (cmp < 0)
//    x.left = put(x.left, key, val);
//  else if (cmp > 0)
//    x.right = put(x.right, key, val);
//  else
//    x.val = val;
  x.count = 1 + size(x.left) + size(x.right);
//  return x;
}
```

## Rank

Now we can implement out rank method, which essentially tells us how many keys are less than the entered key k. Once again we have a recursive algorithm with 3 cases:
1. **k equals the root key** - In this case, we return the size of the left subtree
2. **k is less than the key at root** - We need to recursively apply rank to the left subtree.
3. **k is greater than the key at root** - We need to return 1 + the size of the left subtree + the recursive result of rank on the right subtree

In code, that looks like:

```Java
public int rank(Key key) {
  return rank(key, root);
}

private int rank(Key key, Node current) {
  if (current == null) return 0;
  
  int cmp = key.compareTo(current.key);
  
  if (cmp == 0) return size(current.left);
  if (cmp < 0)  return rank(key, current.left);
  else          return 1 + size(current.left) + rank(key, current.right);
}
```

## Inorder Traversal

Another operation we need to support is iterating over the keys. Again, as is commonly the case with recursive problems, it is instructive to think about how we would approach this for a single node and generalise. For traversing the keys, the operation is obvious. Simply:
* Traverse the left subtree
* Enqueue the current key
* Traverse the right subtree

In code, that looks like:

```Java
public Iterable<Key> keys() {
  Queue<Key> q = new Queue<Key>();
  inorder(root, q);
  return q;
}

private void inorder(Node current, Queue<Key> q) {
  if (current == null) return;
  inorder(current.left, q);
  q.enqueue(current.key);
  inorder(current.right, q);
}
```

## Analysis

The result of all this work is that all of these methods take time proportional to the height of the tree, which we showed in the last note is proportional to log N if the keys are inserted in a random order.