# 8.6 - Deletion in BSTs

Finally, to ensure a dynamic data structure, we'll also need to be able to delete entries from out symbol table. As we'll now see, this leads to some complications when using Binary Search Trees.

## Lazy Approach

The first approach to deletion we'll consider is the lazy approach. Rather than actually deleting the entry, we'll set its value to `null` and leave it in the tree as a 'tombstone'.

As long as there aren't too many deletions, we can keep the search and insertions cost logarithmic. Having said that, this approach becomes cumbersome pretty quick. At some point, you'll hit a tombstone (memory) overload and have to clean out the tombstones.

Thus, while this implementation is does actually get quite a lot of use in the wild, we need to look for something better.

## Deleting the Minimum

As this problem is quite complicated, rather than look at it directly, let's consider a simpler problem, how would we delete the minimum key in the tree?

This process is fairly simple:

* Go left until you find a node with a `null` left link
* Replace that node with its right link
* Update subtree counts

Implementing this algorithm recursively is pretty straightforward:

```Java
public void deleteMin() {
  root = deleteMin(root);
}

private Node deleteMin(Node current) {
  if (current.left == null) return current.right;
  current.left = deleteMin(current.left);
  current.count = 1 + size(current.left) + size(current.right);
  return current;
}
```

An analagous method works for `deleteMax()`

## Hibbard Deletion

This algorithm then forms the basis for a general delete method called Hibbard deletion. The algorithm for Hibbard deletion starts by searching for a node `t` with key `k`, and then contains several cases:

0. The simplest case occurs when a node has no children. In this situation, we just delete the node by setting the parent link to `null`
1. The next case is when the node has 1 child. In this case, we simply replace the node with its child node.
2. Finally, we have the case where the Node has two children. In this case:
   1. Find the successor `x` of `t`. The successor is defined as the next smallest node in the right subtree of `t`. We know how to delete the minimum, so we can
   2. Delete `x`
   3. Put `x` in `t`'s spot.

Why are we using the successor and not the predecessor? No real reason. It's not entirely satisfactory as a result, but it works.

```Java
public void delete(Key key) {
  root = delete(root, key)
}

private Node delete(Node current, Key key) {
  if (current == null) return null;
  
  int cmp = key.compareTo(current.key);
  if      (cmp < 0) current.left = delete(current.left, key);
  else if (cmp > 0) current.right = delete(current.right, key);
  else {
    if (current.left == null) return current.right;
    else if (current.right == null) return current.left;
    
    Node successor = current;
    current = min(successor.right);
    current.right = deleteMin(successor.right);
    current.left = successor.left;  
  }
  current.count = size(current.left) + size(current.right) + 1;
  return current;
}
```

Unfortunately, what you find when you implement Hibbard deletion and alternate insertions and deletions, you find that it makes the tree more unbalanced. Researchers actually showed that it makes the height of the tree *proportional to square root N*, rather than proportional to log N, a significant change.

Finding a simple and efficient deletion algorithm for BSTs remains an open research problem.

## Summary

Thus, we find that with Binary Search Trees, insertion and sort are proportional to log N in the average case, whereas deletion is proportional to root N. Furthermore, all of these operations have a worst case performance proportional to N.

In the next lecture, we'll look at red-black trees, a data structure that resolves our struggles around deletion.