# 2.1 - Observations

The first step of the scientific method is to make some observations, which thankfully is reasonably straightforward in the study of algorithms. 

Our example will be the triple sum problem, which is deeply related to problems of computational geometry:

> Given N distinct integers, how many triples sum to exactly 0?
> 

This is also apparently a simple problem to solve in code (just use 3 nested `for` loops to perform all comparisons). 

(Straight off the bat, we can see that this algorithm has `O(N^3)`, which is terrible. But we haven't got there in the lectures yet, so bear with).

## Timing

How do we time algorithms? Well, there's always the manual way, using a stopwatch. We can even utilise a Java `Stopwatch` to automate this. By entering various different sized of input through the algorithm, we could begin to build a base of measurements, which we could then plot (Time T against input size N). This is an **empirical** analysis. Hello science.

Indeed, continuing to use scientific methods, we could do a log-log plot to determine the exponent of this power law relationship. Using a log-log plot on this algorithm return a slope of 3, which confirms our earlier O(N^3) suspicion.

With this, we can now formulate a **hypothesis** (our N^3 relationship), which we could use to make **predictions**, which we could then **verify and validate**.

### Quick trick for power law relationships

An easy way to suss if there is a power law relationship is to double your input N a few times, and calculate the ratio of successive Ts. If the ratio is roughly a constant, then log_2 of that ratio will give you your power law.

If we want to know the coefficient of our exponent term, we could just solve the equation.

(The caveat to this is that this method cannot determine logarithmic relationships)

## Independent and Dependent effects

One of the issues with this method is that in addition to the algorithm-dependent factors affecting the relationship (i.e. algorithm and input data), which we are interested in experimenting with, there are also system-dependent factors which will affect our running times. I.e. Hardware, software and system specifics.

On the other hand, the cheapness of computers mean that it is relatively easy to deal with these factors, at least relative to the other sciences.