# 2.2 - Mathematical Models

Observing what's happening does give us a way to predict performance, but it doesn't really help us understand what's happening. And so we move to mathematical modelling, which was also popularised by Donald Knuth in the late 1960s.

Thank to Knuth's work (see "The Art of Computer Programming" Volumes 1-4), we indeed have proof that we can exactly determine the running times of algorithms using mathematical methods.

## Cost of operations

A way to start this analysis is to determine the cost of the basic operations (e.g. variable declaration, assignment statements, array access etc.). But normally we will merely postulate that it is some constant.

Items to be careful of are operations that time proportional to N, including:
* array allocation
* string concatenation (which is a common source of performance bugs in novices)

## Frequency of Operations

This is the other main component that leads to algorithmic complexity. 

### 1-Sum

For the following simple function:

```Java
int count = 0;
for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
  if (a[i] == 0)
    count++;
}
```

we have:
* Variable Decleration - 2
* Assignment statement - 2
* less than compare - N-1
* equal to compare - N
* array access - N
* increment - N to 2N (i and count)

### 2-Sum

For:

```Java
int count = 0;
for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
  for (int j = 0; j < N; j++) {
    if (a[i] + a[j] == 0)
      count++;
  }
}
```

we have:
* Variable Decleration - N + 2
* Assignment statement - N + 2
* less than compare - 1/2(N+1)(N+2)
* equal to compare - 1/2 N(N-1)
* array access - N(N-1)
* increment - 1/2 N(N-1) to N(N-1)

(The sums themselves were used using the sum of triangular numbers. Look it up)

## Simplifying the Calculations

These last elements are becoming more and more tedious to calculate. So really, we should focus on the most expensive terms. From this is big O notation born.

To start this, we make two simple simplifications:
1. We make a basic operation a substitute for running time, e.g. array access, so that we don't need to track each operation independently
2. We drop all terms except the highest order one, as for large N in an equation, it will dominate. For small N, we really don't care.

After these simplifications, we discover the 2-sum has **~N^2** array accesses.

### 3-Sum

```Java
int count = 0;
for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
  for (int j = 0; j < N; j++) {
    for (int k = 0; k < N; k++) {
    if (a[i] + a[j] + a[k] == 0)
      count++;
    }
  }
}
```

has array accesses **~1/6 N^3**

Note as an aside, we do need to know some basic discrete sums. An easy way to derive these is to simply replace them with integrals and calculate.

## Conclusion

Accurate mathematical models are available but both very complex, and almost often unnecessary.

Approximate models can achieve similar results with a great, great deal less work.